Methods and formulas
test and testparm perform Wald tests. Let the estimated coefficient vector be b and the estimated
variance –covariance matrix be V. Let Rb = r denote the set of q linear hypotheses to be tested
jointly.
The Wald test statistic is (Judge et al. 1985, 20 – 28)
W = (Rb − r)
0
(RVR0
)
−1
(Rb − r)
If the estimation command reports its significance levels using Z statistics, a χ
2
distribution with
q degrees of freedom,
W ∼ χ
2
q
is used for computation of the significance level of the hypothesis test.
If the estimation command reports its significance levels using t statistics with d degrees of freedom,
an F statistic,
F =
1
q
W
is computed, and an F distribution with q numerator degrees of freedom and d denominator degrees
of freedom computes the significance level of the hypothesis test.
The two-step constrained estimates bc displayed by test with the coef option are the GLS estimates
of the unconstrained estimates b subject to the specified constraints Rb = c (Gourieroux and Monfort
1995, chap. 10),
bc = b − VR0
(RVR0
)
−1
(Rb − r)
with variance –covariance matrix
Vc = V − VR0
(RVR0
)
−1RV
If test displays a Wald test for joint (simultaneous) hypotheses, it can also display all 1-degree-of-
freedom tests, with p-values adjusted for multiple testing. Let p1, p2, . . . , pk be the unadjusted p-values
of these 1-degree-of-freedom tests. The Bonferroni-adjusted p-values are defined as p
b
i = min(1, kpi).
The Sid ˇ ak-adjusted ´ p-values are p
s
i = 1−(1−pi)
k
. Holm’s method for adjusting p-values is defined
as p
h
i = min(1, kipi), where ki
is the number of p-values at least as large as pi
. Note that p
h
i < pb
i
,
reflecting that Holm’s method is strictly less conservative than the widely used Bonferroni method.
If test is used after a svy command, it carries out an adjusted Wald test—this adjustment should
not be confused with the adjustment for multiple testing. Both adjustments may actually be combined.
Specifically, the survey adjustment uses an approximate F statistic (d−k+1)W/(kd), where W is the
Wald test statistic, k is the dimension of the hypothesis test, and d = the total number of sampled PSUs
minus the total number of strata. Under the null hypothesis, (d−k+1)F/(kd) ∼ F(k, d−k+1), where
F(k, d−k +1) is an F distribution with k numerator degrees of freedom and d−k +1 denominator
degrees of freedom. If nosvyadjust is specified, the p-value is computed using W/k ∼ F(k, d).
See Korn and Graubard (1990) for a detailed description of the Bonferroni adjustment technique
and for a discussion of the relative merits of it and of the adjusted and unadjusted Wald tests.
